this video is brought to you by
Squarespace in 2006 researchers first
detected a strange peak in the amount of
methane in Earth's atmosphere a
greenhouse gas more powerful than carbon
dioxide while the scientific Community
rushed to explain the sudden rise they
found to their surprise that for once at
least it didn't match any relative
increase in human fossil fuel use it
looked as if overnight a big new source
of methane had simply turned on
something happening on a a global scale
but no one could determine what was
actually causing it these methane spikes
happen every 100,000 years or so and are
usually an indication of an Ice Age
termination event a rapid warming at the
end of an ice age that within just a
couple of decades transitions the planet
from largely ice covered to The Climate
that we experience today but the last
one only happened 12,000 years ago at
the end of the last glacial maximum so
why are we seeing another rise in
methane so soon and what is causing it
and 16 years later as the peak continues
to grow year on year are we on track for
a major climate reversal this is a topic
that I find absolutely fascinating it's
rare we find such a predominant Smoking
Gun of something happening on a global
scale that we fundamentally don't
understand that also isn't the result of
our direct impact on the planet to
answer the question of what is actually
going on here we need to understand some
of the history of the planet and its
climate
currently we're in the quaternary period
spanning from about 2.58 million years
ago to the present day the quaternary
period has broken into two different
epochs the first is the pene epoch from
about 2 and a half million years ago to
11,700 years ago and it was known for
its cyclical ice ages where during
glaciation periods vast ice sheets would
expand to cover much of North America
northern Europe and Asia then after
several tens of thousands of years they
would Retreat over just a few thousand
years to a period of warmer Global
Climate the pine also saw significant
evolutionary developments and migrations
for humans for instance Homo erectus
emerged in the early Pine and the
atomically analogous modern Homo Sapien
appeared later in the epoch eventually
colonizing most of the planet the pine
also witnessed the megap foral
extinctions where many large animals
like Willy mammoths mastadons
saber-tooth cats eventually went extinct
this was partly due to human hunting
pressures but it was thought mostly to
be driven by the significant climate
shifts that could have disrupted
habitats and food sources in many of the
megal fornal species as the planet
transitioned into its second Epoch the
holos we've had one yes what about
second Epoch from about 12,000 years ago
to the present day marks the most recent
period where the glaciers retreated and
the planet has seen relatively stable
and warm climate conditions here's where
the terminology gets I think a little
bit confusing we are still technically
in an ice age just an ice age where the
glaciers don't cover as much of the
planet as they can do we call this
period an interglacial period 50 million
years ago the planet was too hot for any
ice to form at the poles so relative to
that the Earth is definitely still in an
ice age this most recent Hollen Epoch is
significant for human history as the
stable and comparatively warm climate
allowed for the development of
Agriculture and consequently the growth
of large human settlements and complex
societies culminating obviously in the
creation of social media the transition
that brought us from the holos scene and
from all glacial to interglacial periods
are called Ice Age termination events
again we're still in the Ice Age yes
it's confusing these termination events
are typically made up of three distinct
phases though exactly the demarcations
between each phase kind of vary
depending on what researcher you're
actually talking to
the first phase is called the deglacial
onset its slow but steady increase in
global temperatures marking the
beginning of the end for the glacial
period it usually lasts several tens of
thousands of years this is often driven
by changes to Earth orbit called
milankovich Cycles these predominantly
relate to how the Earth is angled or
orbiting around the Sun starting with e
centricity it describes the Earth's
orbit around the Sun and measures how
much the orbital path deviates from a A
Perfect Circle this can vary from zero
it's a perfect circle to around
0.067 it's more of an oval or an ellipse
currently the eccentricity is around
0.017 so we are pretty circular in our
orbital nature when the Earth's orbit is
more elliptical though the difference in
solar energy that the Earth receives
called insulation which is a word I have
to look up every single time I need it
between the closest approach and the
most distant approach can vary
tremendously this effect has a
periodicity of roughly 100,000 years and
over the past 800,000 years for which
we've got data from Ice records
termination events have been pretty well
aligned with this cycle leading to Major
glacial to interglacial shifts
approximately 100,000 years apart but
actually we don't think that this
particular factor is the predominant
milankovich driver of a termination
event as the Earth rotates around the
Sun it is tilted at an angle of
23.5째 but over time this oscillates
between approximately 22.1 and about
24.5 in a period of 41,000 years from
minimum to maximum or about 82,000 years
for a full oscillation from 21째 all the
way up and then all the way back down
again when the Tilt is greater what this
does is expose a larger polar region and
means that it receives more solar
radiation during the summer which can
ultimately lead to to more rapid melting
of the ice sheets this in turn can have
various feedback effects on the global
climate looking at these events over the
last 800,000 years you can see there's a
huge amount of correlation between when
they occur and when we are triggered
into an Ice Age termination event today
the axial tilt is decreasing from its
maximum value and is moving towards the
lower end of the range which should in
theory be reducing the amount of melting
effects on the ice caps the final effect
I want to talk about is procession the
wobble of the Earth's axis and affects
the timing of the seasons relative to
the position of Earth's orbit around the
sun this possession cycle operates on
time scales of approximately 19,000 to
23,000 years and we again see pretty
regular alignment between these
occurrences and termination events it
obviously isn't perfect though it seems
to be a combination of all these factors
working together that actually drive a
termination event to start these three
malanovic factors drive a feedback loop
which further propagates warming of the
planet as the ice begins to melt darker
Ocean or land and surfaces are exposed
these darker surfaces are better
absorbers of sunlight which leads to
further warming and more melting as the
process continues the Earth enters a
rapid warming period called full
deglaciation with significant further
ice melt and a corresponding rise in sea
levels over a very short period usually
over a matter of just decades this
process is driven by the Rapid Release
of greenhouse gases like CO2 and methane
which were pre previously dissolved in
cold oceans or in the Now Melting
permafrost ice layers the release of
these gases drives further warming
accelerating the process and often
driving reorganization and strengthening
ocean currents which serve to distribute
heat more evenly around the planet it's
only after this second rapid heating
phase that global temperatures begin to
stabilize marking the onset of an
interglacial period which is the period
that we are in now these ice sheets will
also stabilize and start to reduce their
size and sea levels will broadly come
into some level of equilibrium while the
system is still influenced by continuing
effects of increased greenhouse gases
malanovic Cycles negative feedback loops
begin to play a more substantial role
for instance as temperatures increase
the growth of vegetation in previously
ice covered areas acts as a carbon sink
absorbing CO2 out of the atmosphere over
a longer time scale weathering processes
on land can then start to draw down
atmospheric CO2 and lock it away in
sediments and deposits while it also
equilibrates with the now warmer oceans
all of which serve to stabilize CO2 and
temperature levels in the atmosphere
this is the phase we're in now the
hallene the interglacial period so why
as of 2006 have we started to see this
huge methane increase that we would only
typically usually see in deglaciation
phases of an Ice Age termination event
it has been just 12,000 years since the
last one not the usual 100,000 years
that we usually see between the two what
is going on but first I have to thank
today's sponsor Squarespace Squarespace
is the reason why I am where I am today
that sounds overly dramatic but it is
absolutely true I launched my first
company to help scientists start
startups based on their scientific
breakthroughs having an incredibly
intuitive easy-to ouse website builder
to build a strong brand to communicate a
mission was a central piece of what made
our teams differentiated and look like
companies that were professional and
ready for investment I built about 40
Squarespace websites in the past four
years because having tried pretty much
all of the other options out there it is
an order of magnitude friendlier easy to
use and more powerful Squarespace lets
you get started by using one of their
professional website templates and then
it adds a huge amount of customizability
on top of that what they've done
recently with their fluid design engine
has taken an already great product to
the next level making it super intuitive
to design a website that you want while
the platform helps you build a strong
and consistent aesthetic throughout
we're in a digital world and I think
everyone needs something some level of
Internet presence building a personal or
a team website is a fantastic place to
start head to squarespace.com doben
miles to save 10% on your first purchase
of a website or domain using the code Dr
Ben miles thank you Squarespace for
existing now back to the
video although human emissions soared in
the 1980s as the natural gas industry
boomed by the 1990s these levels had
stabilized the 2006 finding ings
prompted a wave of Investigation to find
the source of why methane had suddenly
started to increase again this it turns
out is a reasonably difficult thing to
do methane's a hydrocarbon and it's one
of the principal components of natural
gas methane is produced naturally in
Wetlands oceans geological processes
such as venting and obviously through
other biological processes where usually
cow farts get the majority of the blame
methane typically remains in the
atmosphere for about a decade at a time
before it is broken down predominantly
by hydroxy radicals to form CO2 and
water while there is a much shorter
lifetime for methane by comparison to
something like CO2 it has a much higher
warming potential for a couple of
reasons methane's bonds and its
structure are very effective at
absorbing and emitting infrared
radiation heat specifically at about 3.5
and 8 microns wavelength that 3.5 and 8
Micron band is also in an atmospheric
window that usually can make its way
freely out to space whereas CO2 absorbs
around the 4 Micron and 15 Micron
waveband which the atmosphere already
absorbs effectively this makes methane's
contribution to the greenhouse effect
much more pronounced in the past few
years we've become significantly better
at detecting where methane is actually
coming from both from the ground and
from space as in measuring it from
satellites not leaks from space there
are a few ways of doing this passively
and active approaches but one that I
want to talk about that I think is
particularly interesting is by firing a
laser ER at the ground if you pick a
wavelength of laser that's either 3.5 or
8 Micron in the infrared the earth looks
a bit like a mirror and actually a lot
of this light bounces off of the ground
and some small fraction of it will make
its way back up into the sky to your
satellite by sweeping the laser over the
ground if you suddenly see much less
laser light coming back to you you know
that it must have been absorbed and most
likely it was absorbed by methane
because nothing else in that band really
absorbs those wavelengths this can help
you create a map of methane levels
around the planet in one search for
methane that I saw teams from NASA's jet
propulsion laboratory detected a plume
of methane at least 3 mil long in the
sky above an Iranian landfill this new
found super emitter is pumping out about
18,700 lb or 8,500 kg of methane into
the air every single hour that's a lot
but interestingly it pales in comparison
to a cluster of 12 super Emitt spotted
in Turkmenistan all of them associated
with oil and gas infrastructure and some
of those plumes are up to 20 M long and
together they're adding about 111,000 lb
or 50,000 kg of methane to Earth's
atmosphere every hour but these are
reasonably recent events the most recent
findings published in global biog
geochemical Cycles which is malul points
to methane emissions increased from
tropical and Wetland regions as
increased temperatur and CO2 levels have
driven faster growth this has meant that
when trees and plants grow and then die
and start to decompose it drives a
higher rate of methane release we've
touched on this already but also
permafrost regions store vast amounts of
carbon estimated to be about twice as
much carbon as there currently exists in
the atmosphere but they also contain
trapped organic material as the Perros
Thor the organic material within it
begins to decompose also releasing
methane and further CO2 similarly while
many modern landfills have methane
capture systems not all of that methane
is captured and some is released into
the atmosphere the methane sensing
technology I described previously is
actually being deployed to both oil and
gas infrastructure as well as landfills
to help better map leaks and collect
methane emerging from the ground and I
would like to say that this is because
we care about the environment and the
climate but actually I think the
stronger motivator is that if you can
stop leaks you save money or if you can
Capt methane emerging from the ground
you can pump it into a gas electric
plant and burn it to produce electricity
then sell that electricity to the grid
to make money turning a literal pile of
hot garbage into cash and yes this also
generates CO2 burning methane but that's
the lesser of two greenhouse gases to
emit so what does all this actually mean
for us although Agriculture and waste
sources have increased between 2006 and
2022 to account for about half of the
methane increase that we see the other
half of recent growth in methane
emissions is believed to be driven by
natural biogenic processes especially
the Wetland feedback loop and although
the increas in global biogenic methane
emissions is within the multicentury
range of historic emissions meaning that
it's not totally unusual that the planet
could be producing this level of methane
the speed and acceleration of this most
recent trend is Extreme by all
historical standards even during the
post 1800's rise driven by fossil fuel
use this component of methane's current
change is likely outside anything Nature
has ever done before at least in recent
history all that to say it's not that we
can't account for the methane increase
we're getting increasingly sophisticated
at understanding where it is exactly
being emitted from it's more that we
don't know what line this trend will
follow and if it isn't directly us
producing methane but nature itself it's
potentially much harder to slow down or
interfere or to stop this process
capturing methane is really difficult
even compared to capturing CO2 out of
the air this is partly because methane
is about 200 times less abundant in the
atmosphere than CO2 there are some
approaches out there that I've seen
things like zeolites which are porous
minerals that can convert methane to CO2
this approach and other ones like it
though have largely gone underexplored
because producing CO2 isn't a very
useful byproduct at the moment but if it
means that less potent greenhouse gases
are emerging into the atmosphere some
development in this area might actually
be worthwhile the question remains
though what is driving the change in our
biomes that has moved them to this Mass
methane output and will it slow down or
will it get worse question two is what
does this actually mean for our planet
and there the honest answer is we don't
really know the only thing we have to
compare it to is past Ice Age
termination events as a somewhat proxy
of what might be happening here but this
isn't a termination event driven by the
usual mechanisms so we are totally off
book in terms of what that actually
means and what could be expected to
happen here if we are in a termination
like event given that we're in an
interglacial period at the moment where
the Glaciers are already receded could
this knock us out of an Ice Age entirely
at the moment like I said we really
don't know in the words of the
researchers in the most recent study it
remains possible that methane's current
growth is within the range of holine
variability but it is also possible that
this shift May indicate a large scale
reorganization of the natural climate
and biosphere is already well
underway has merely a single pandemic or
only a handful of financial crashes left
you wanting more termination likee
events in your life I just did a video
on NASA's work to deflect City
destroying asteroids you can check it
out here if you like this sort of
content please do consider subscribing
or if you like this video please do
leave a like to support the channel if
you think scientists are rockstars go
grab a t-shirt like this one this one's
Marie cury looking kind of cool and
witchy the link will be in the
description down below until next time
thanks for watching goodbye